+++
author = "Alex K Gold"
categories = ["conference", "R"]
date = "2017-04-23"
description = "R Stats NYC 2017"
featuredpath = "date"
linktitle = ""
title = "R Stats NYC 2017"
type = "post"
+++

Friday and Saturday of this weekend was the 2017 [RStatsNYC](http://www.rstats.nyc/) conference. With the small exception of remarkably uncomfortable chairs, the conference was fantastic (and great food!). There was a remarkable variety in what the speakers covered -- from deep thoughts on the ethics and philosophy of doing data science, to some super useful RStudio tips and tricks and everything in between. I decided to take my notes from the two days and post below in case there's things anyone else might find useful.

_See, really good food!_
{{< tweet 855782617731518464 >}}

One of the remarkable similarities between the speakers was the degree to which many talks focused on _process_ of doing data science. It feels like there's a lot of room for growth in terms of understanding and standardizing best practices of doing data science.

## Deep Thoughts
Many of the speakers shared some great nuggets of insight into doing data science that extended far beyond simple lessons about `R`. Some of my favorites below. 

### The Past, Present, and Future of Data Science
* Statistics has gradually added different parts of the statistical process to the field — but many process points remain to be integrated. We don’t have a theory of a good statistical workflow. Meta-systematization is needed. We need to systematize how we systematize things.
* Why do we need theory? Theory is scalable. Simulations are not. 
* We should be specifying priors about effect sizes along with research designs.
* Is having a core data science team at a company a good thing or a bad thing?
* The history of software engineering is a great guide for the future of data science. 
* As data gets bigger, machine learning problems and questions will get bigger too. Our jobs are safe.
* The hardest job of a data scientist is turning open-ended problems in the real world into practical problem statements that are solvable using data. Defining success is essential.
* Software engineers build and grow software — the sky is the limit. Data scientists are _scientists_ and are constrained by the real world.

### Data Science as Business Intelligence (and Empathy)
* Analysis doesn’t end at result delivery — it ends at developing and proselytizing new business strategies and innovation.
* Automating Excel workflows can be a first step towards bringing `R` to a team.
* Agile development tells user stories as an empathy hack. 
```
As a ______
I want ______
So I can ______ 
```
* Person-level stories (the near) are always more meaningful than data stories (the far). We need to balance both as Data Scientists.
* In development, we need to have an actual user in mind, rather than a theoretical user who wants everything.

### How to Live-Tweet an Event (a great aside)
* Three important elements in live tweet of event: conference hashtag `#rstatsnyc`, @speaker (put . first so it’s viewable publicly), always include a pic.
* They can have one of a few purposes: intro person/topic, spread insight, link to resource, spread positivity!

_Live tweet: conference hashtag, @speaker, picture, positivity_
{{< tweet 855792361527541760 >}}

### How to Hackathon
* If you’re not at risk of failing a few days a quarter, you’re not pushing.
* Keys to focused hacking: rock solid infrastrure, minimize context switching (away messages), parallel work, strong and clear conversation, timeline accountability (detailed to the half-hour), positive team dynamic, time-boxing decisions.
* How to start an analysis:
	* Identify assumptions about a solution
	* Rank assumptions by how critical they are
	* Test assumptions with the simplest experiment possible
* Fail fast. The worst thing about spending a few months barking up the wrong tree isn’t the time or money lost — it’s team demoralization.
* Truths about data science:
	* Nerd != won’t engage with business
	* Shiny tool != hard problem
	* Shiny tool != being a smart data scientist
	
### Open Source and Package-Building
* The hardest step in joining the open source community is going from 0 contributions to 1.
* Open source contributions: failing test with fix > failing test > bug report
	* Remember to include `sessionInfo()`
* Package release ideas: 
	* Release quickly, but also slowly — take time to fix dumb decisions
	* Blaze new trails, but don’t reinvent the wheel
	* Tell people about your package — then listen. 
* Package design: documentation > usability > performance > features

## Interesting Research
There were only a few presentations of actual research projects — but the ones presented were really wonderful.

* Cell tower data can reveal interesting patterns in movement — in particular return to normal flow of people after natural disasters.
* [Stack Overflow](http://www.kaggle.com/stackoverflow) has a selection of data from stack overflow — can do text analysis on it. There’s also a jobs list and an [api](http://www.api.stackoverflow.com).
* It is possible to [predict](https://dssg.uchicago.edu/project/early-intervention-system-for-adverse-police-interactions/) which officers in police departments will have adverse incidents with the public in order to arrange interventions. Nashville and Charlottesville are doing this. This work can save lives.
* ROpenSci does peer review for `R` packages. Many of their packages get data from scientific databases or interface with scientific equipment.

## Statistical and Programming Tools
* Convolutional Neural Net: used for image recognition
* VPNs are good privacy tools, we should probably all use one.

## R Packages to Investigate
There were so many neat R packages mentioned over the course of the conference. Here was a short list of ones I didn’t know and wanted to look into.

* `packrat`: helps you create a package template file
* `plumber`: allows you to easily turn regular R code into an API
* `RXKCD`: add [XKCD](http://www.xkcd.com) cartoons to stuff!
* `trelliscope`: many-panel data vis
* `compareGroups`: compare demographics and other aspects across groups
* `htmlWidgets`: integrate `javascript` applets into `R` code. We want interactivity, and javascript is de-facto standard for everything having to do with interactivity.
	* `ipywidgets`: similar for `python`
* `broom`: turn analytics output into tidy data frames
* `goodpractice`: does a variety of checking for good package development practice
	* `lintr`: helps check for good code style
	* `devtools::spellcheck()`
* `solidify`, `highcharts`: commonly used presentation packages
* `tidytext`: help turn text into tidy data frames

## Generally Helpful Programming Hints, tips, and tricks

* `rr-init`: ROpenSci package to create skeleton of project
* Run `R` script `myscript.R` from command line: `Rscript myscript.R`
* RStudio Server runs on port 8787 by default
* Anaconda can be used to download a local R version
* Can install entire tidy verse at once: `install.packages(“tidyverse”)`
* Always choose a license for your [github](http://www.github.com) repo. MIT is the loosest.
* Can put an empty folder in a git repo by creating and adding a file to git `touch folder/.gitkeep`
* `make` bash — can create a makefile (`make.sh`) with assigned dependencies and will only run files that have been updated since last run
* Join [R mailing list](http://www.r-project.org/mail.html)
* Contributing to documentation (or improving unhelpful error messages) is a great way to get started on contributing to Open Source
* In R `save()` saves multiple objects with their names as `.Rda`. Using `load` restores them into the environment. `saveRds()` saves a single object without its name. Restoring requires assignment `a <- readRds()`.

## RStudio Hints, Tips, Tricks
The RStudio folks gave a great presentation on some tricks and tips in RStudio. Some of my favorite takeaways: 

* Realtime inline `TeX` previews in RNotebooks: `$EQN$`
* Notebook preview — doesn’t re-run, just renders what’s been run
* Can include code chunks that run code other than R (SQL, Bash, Python). Instead of `{r}` in chunk header, put (e.g.) `{sql connection = con, output.var = ‘varname’}` and then can put `SELECT` statement in body that will be assigned to `varname`
* If you want to include variables in SQL code, use `?varname` in code.
* RStudio git integration provides nice way to view diffs
* Tab autocomplete is fuzzy — just type unique letters in command and tab for rest
* `Shift-Tab` to insert code snippets — there are built in (`tools > global options > code snippets`)
* Starting to type a command and then `cmd + arrow up` gives history of all times that command used
* Can easily go from history to console or script
* `ctrl + .` search files, fns, etc
* `CTRL + SHIFT + .` search among tabs
* `ctrl + shift + f` (“or if that’s too hard to remember, ctrl capital F”) to customize where searching
* `SHIFT + ALT + k` list keyboard shortcuts
